Ballot SC-75 - Pre-sign linting (#518)
cabforum/servercert: docs/BR.md

| 2023-09-15     | Section 7 (and others) | CAs MUST use the updated Certificate Profiles passed in Version 2.0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 2024-03-15     | 4.9.7               | CAs MUST generate and publish CRLs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

> | 2024-09-15     | 4.3.1.2             | the CA SHOULD implement a Linting process to test the technical conformity of the to-be-issued Certificate with these Requirements.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 2024-09-15     | 4.3.1.2             | The CA SHOULD implement a Linting process to test the technical conformity of the to-be-issued Certificate with these Requirements.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
```

> | 2025-03-15     | 4.3.1.2                    | the CA SHALL implement a Linting process to test the technical conformity of the to-be-issued Certificate with these Requirements.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 2025-03-15     | 4.3.1.2                    | The CA SHALL implement a Linting process to test the technical conformity of the to-be-issued Certificate with these Requirements.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
```

**Legal Entity**: An association, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, trust, government entity or other entity with legal standing in a country's legal system.

> **Linting**: A process where the content of digitally signed data such as a Certificate, Certificate Revocation List, or OCSP response, or data-to-be-signed object such as a `tbsCertificate` (as described in [RFC 5280, Section 4.1.1.1](https://tools.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280##section-4.1.1.1)) is checked for conformance with the profiles and requirements defined in these Requirements.

Author: Addressed in ff98db748736ed19c0c4fc41e59ced4d1ff97b3e

### 4.3.1 CA actions during certificate issuance

#### 4.3.1.1 Manual authorization of certificate issuance for Root CAs

Certificate issuance by the Root CA SHALL require an individual authorized by the CA (i.e. the CA system operator, system officer, or PKI administrator) to deliberately issue a direct command in order for the Root CA to perform a certificate signing operation.

#### 4.3.1.2 Linting of to-be-signed Certificate content

> Due to the complexity in implementing the certificate-formatting standards of these Requirements when issuing publicly-trusted Certificates, before a Certificate or Precertificate [RFC 6962] is issued, effective 2024-09-15 the CA SHOULD implement a Linting process to test the technical conformity of the to-be-signed Certificate with these Requirements. Effective 2025-03-15, the CA SHALL implement a Linting process to test the technical conformity of the to-be-signed Certificate with these Requirements.

Reviewer: I think the current language is unclear whether linting of the TBS final Certificate is required if TBS linting of the corresponding Precertificate is performed.

I don't think that TBS final Certificate linting is needed as long as the CA has a technical control to verify that the TBS content of the Precertificate matches the content of the TBS final certificate. Absent that, it would be good to lint the TBS final Certificate.

Thoughts?

Author: I'm not sure about that one. Perhaps @robstradling can assist?

Reviewer 2: I agree with Corey's statement - "I don't think that TBS final Certificate linting is needed as long as the CA has a technical control to verify that the TBS content of the Precertificate matches the content of the TBS final certificate" - although I would change "matches" to "corresponds to".  (The TBS objects are not identical; one has the poison extension, whilst the other has the SCT List extension).

I've had a go at wordsmithing this paragraph...

```suggestion
Due to the complexity involved in implementing the Certificate Profiles defined by these Requirements, it is considered best practice for the CA to implement a Linting process to test the technical conformity of each to-be-signed artifact prior to signing it.  When a Precertificate has undergone Linting, it is not necessary for the corresponding to-be-signed Certificate to also undergo Linting, provided that the CA has a technical control to verify that the to-be-signed Certificate corresponds to the to-be-signed Precertificate in the manner described by RFC 6962, Section 3.2.
Effective 2024-09-15, the CA SHOULD implement such a Linting process.
Effective 2025-03-15, the CA SHALL implement such a Linting process.
```

WDYT?

Reviewer: I think this language is good. Two comments:

1. "matches" is used in the same context in section 4.9.10, so there is consistency in using that term. That being said, "corresponds to" is fine as well. Maybe change 4.9.10 if we go with "corresponds to"?
2. "Certificate Profiles" are not defined by these Requirements, but rather they are documents/configurations that yield Certificates that comply with the requirements in section 7. Given this, I suggest changing the first clause of the first sentence to:
```
Due to the complexity involved in implementing Certificate Profiles that conform to these Requirements, ...
```

Reviewer 2: Thanks @CBonnell.  I support changing 4.9.10 to get rid of "matches".

FYI, there's at least one more example of existing language that's consistent with this (i.e., "corresponds to" without "matches") - see Section 7.1.2.9, which says _"The existence of a signed Precertificate can be treated as evidence of a corresponding Certificate also existing,"_

With the current wording of the Definition of "Certificate Profiles", I have to +1 to your suggested change.  However, given the Definition of "Technically Constrained Subordinate CA Certificate" (see below, emphasis mine), I wonder if we need to tweak the Definition of "Certificate Profiles" instead...

_"Technically Constrained Subordinate CA Certificate: A Subordinate CA certificate which uses a
combination of Extended Key Usage and/or Name Constraint extensions, as **defined within the
relevant Certificate Profiles of this document**, to limit the scope within which the Subordinate CA
Certificate may issue Subscriber or additional Subordinate CA Certificates."_

WDYT?

Reviewer: These are good call-outs. I think we want to retain the current definition of Certificate Profiles, as it was created for a specific purpose tied to a normative requirement (logging requirements in 5.4.1). Any misuse of the defined term should be corrected instead of shoehorning the definition to make it fit in all its current usages.

Author: I believe fe2a2d333b6d761d1a62fda4f4317425f9ec8e3a improves the language for this particular ballot. I suggest @robstradling @CBonnell to create an issue regarding the "Certificate Profiles" definition and possible other improvements to handle in a separate ballot. Please let me know if you are ok with this to resolve this conversation.

Reviewer 2: @dzacharo That works for me.

Reviewer: https://github.com/cabforum/servercert/issues/526

Methods used to produce a certificate containing the to-be-signed Certificate content include, but are not limited to:

1. Sign the `tbsCertificate` with a "dummy" Private Key whose Public Key component is not certified by a Certificate that chains to a publicly-trusted CA Certificate; or
2. Specify a static value for the `signature` field of the Certificate ASN.1 SEQUENCE.

CAs MAY implement their own certificate Linting tools, but CAs SHOULD use the Linting tools that have been widely adopted by the industry (see https://cabforum.org/resources/tools/). 

> CAs are encouraged to contribute to open-source linting projects, such as by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CAs are encouraged to contribute to open-source Linting projects, such as by:
```

> - creating new or improving existing lints,

Author: > "improving existing lints" is a fairly broad mandate. Is there value in explicitly mentioning reporting potentially inaccurate linting results as bugs to the upstream project?
> 
> In particular this might help avoid the case where a CA encounters a linter result, believes it to be inaccurate, and disables the lint without further upstream action. In the case the linter is correct and the analysis by the CA wrong, this would hopefully shake out in the discussion that followed. In the case the linter is truly incorrect, it would let the other users of the tool benefit from a fix.

Thanks @cpu , I added an explicit suggestion in 141d6fee5d148a6ef29a0ddd8612abc327217475 but also kept the broad mandate for "general improvements". Hope that works for everyone.

> - creating new or improving existing lints,

Reviewer 3: WFM :+1:, thanks!

> - reporting Requirements that are not covered by existing lints ("unlinted issues"), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- reporting requirements that are not covered by existing lints ("unlinted issues"), 
```

Reviewer: The Defined Term "Requirements" refers to the current document as a whole.

Author: I'd rather use a different word to make it more clear to readers. Please let me know what you think about the following:

```suggestion
- reporting issues of technical checks that are not covered by existing lints ("unlinted issues"), 
```

Reviewer: I'm having some trouble understanding what "issue" is in this context. I think it's shorthand for "Github issue" or similar, so perhaps this is more direct:

```
- notifying maintainers of Linting software of checks that are not covered by existing lints, 
```

- updating documentation of existing lints, and 
- generating test certificates for positive/negative tests of specific lints.

> #### 4.3.1.3 Linting of issued Certificates

Reviewer: I think this should be a sub-section of 4.3.1.2, as it is not an action taken by the CA prior to Certificate issuance.

Author: I thought about this when deciding on a separate number. The title of 4.3.1.2 is "Linting of to-be-signed Certificate content" which doesn't make sense to include suggestions/recommendations/requirements for linting of final certificates. That's why a separate same-level subsection was created. Similarly, the update section of linters applies to both "pre-sign" and "post-sign" linting.

Does that make sense?

Reviewer: It would be clearer if we moved this section to 8.7.1. That would make it clear that this activity a part of periodic self-audits and not an activity performed before/during Certificate issuance.

Author: Thanks. I believe it's addressed in 27680a69fb505ad03790d4160fed9b391a7e2093. Please confirm.

Reviewer: Moving to 8.7 itself is fine, although it will cause a divergence in the content of that section with other documents. Likely not material now, but might be when moving to BR of BRs.

Author: The BR of BRs will provide an opportunity for WGs to evaluate good practices of other WGs. My hope is that Linting will be considered a good practice in S/MIME and Code Signing WGs as well.

CAs MAY use a Linting process to test each issued Certificate.

CAs SHOULD use a Linting process to test the technical accuracy of already issued Certificates against the sample set described in [section 8.7](#87-self-audits).

> #### 4.3.1.4 Updates of Linting software

Reviewer: I think this should be a sub-section of 4.3.1.2, as it is not an action taken by the CA prior to Certificate issuance.

Author: Perhaps the update process of a linter should go to another section (perhaps the currently-empty section 6.6.1 System development controls), and perhaps the suggestion for linting final certificates should go to section 8.7.

Thoughts about that?

Author: Addressed in 333693934193c733ec5a7f775029ef033c6db5c4

If a CA uses Linting software developed by third parties, it SHOULD monitor for updated versions of that software and plan for updates no later than three (3) months from the release of the update.

> The CA MAY perform Linting on the corpus of its unexpired, un-revoked Subscriber Certificates whenever it updates the Linting software.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this MAY-level requirement adds any value, as I think it's rather evident CAs can lint whenever they like. That being said, I don't strongly object to its inclusion.

Author: It serves as a "hint" that this is a good practice but it's not mandatory to follow (with the RFC 2119 interpretation of SHOULD/RECOMMENDED). I prefer to leave it. It doesn't seem to make things worse.

### 4.3.1 CA actions during certificate issuance

#### 4.3.1.1 Manual authorization of certificate issuance for Root CAs

Certificate issuance by the Root CA SHALL require an individual authorized by the CA (i.e. the CA system operator, system officer, or PKI administrator) to deliberately issue a direct command in order for the Root CA to perform a certificate signing operation.

#### 4.3.1.2 Linting of to-be-signed Certificate content

> Due to the complexity involved in implementing the Certificate Profiles defined by these Requirements, it is considered best practice for the CA to implement a Linting process to test the technical conformity of each to-be-signed artifact prior to signing it. When a Precertificate has undergone Linting, it is not necessary for the corresponding to-be-signed Certificate to also undergo Linting, provided that the CA has a technical control to verify that the to-be-signed Certificate corresponds to the to-be-signed Precertificate in the manner described by RFC 6962, Section 3.2.

Author: @CBonnell highlighted that the defined term "Certificate Profiles" points to the CA's CPS or a certificate template file used by CA software. He suggested the following change for accuracy:

```suggestion
Due to the complexity involved in implementing Certificate Profiles that conform to these Requirements, it is considered best practice for the CA to implement a Linting process to test the technical conformity of each to-be-signed artifact prior to signing it. When a Precertificate has undergone Linting, it is not necessary for the corresponding to-be-signed Certificate to also undergo Linting, provided that the CA has a technical control to verify that the to-be-signed Certificate corresponds to the to-be-signed Precertificate in the manner described by RFC 6962, Section 3.2.
```

## 8.7 Self-Audits

> During the period in which the CA issues Certificates, the CA SHALL monitor adherence to its Certificate Policy, Certification Practice Statement and these Requirements and strictly control its service quality by performing self audits on at least a quarterly basis against a randomly selected sample of the greater of one certificate or at least three percent of the Certificates issued by it during the period commencing immediately after the previous self-audit sample was taken. Effective 2025-03-15 the CA SHOULD use a Linting process to test the technical accuracy of already issued Certificates against this sample set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the period in which the CA issues Certificates, the CA SHALL monitor adherence to its Certificate Policy, Certification Practice Statement and these Requirements and strictly control its service quality by performing self audits on at least a quarterly basis against a randomly selected sample of the greater of one certificate or at least three percent of the Certificates issued by it during the period commencing immediately after the previous self-audit sample was taken. Effective 2025-03-15, the CA SHOULD use a Linting process to verify the technical accuracy of Certificates within the selected sample set.
```

Author: Addressed in 314c0ec5d2b052fedd2c375d8b95adc13de76f33.

## 8.7 Self-Audits

> During the period in which the CA issues Certificates, the CA SHALL monitor adherence to its Certificate Policy, Certification Practice Statement and these Requirements and strictly control its service quality by performing self audits on at least a quarterly basis against a randomly selected sample of the greater of one certificate or at least three percent of the Certificates issued by it during the period commencing immediately after the previous self-audit sample was taken. Effective 2025-03-15, the CA SHOULD use a Linting process to verify the technical accuracy of Certificates within the selected sample set.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
During the period in which the CA issues Certificates, the CA SHALL monitor adherence to its Certificate Policy, Certification Practice Statement and these Requirements and strictly control its service quality by performing self audits on at least a quarterly basis against a randomly selected sample of the greater of one certificate or at least three percent of the Certificates issued by it during the period commencing immediately after the previous self-audit sample was taken. 

Effective 2025-03-15, the CA SHOULD use a Linting process to verify the technical accuracy of Certificates within the selected sample set independantly of previous linting performed on the same certificate.
```
